---
title: "ZFS: The Filesystem of the Future"
category: linux
published: true
tags: ['nas', 'zfs']
comments: false
date: 2019-10-28
---

ZFS is the most advanced filesystem ever created.
Seriously, it's amazing. I still marvel at how well it is designed whenever I think about it.
BTRFS is quite nice as well, but it just doesn't compare: It is much less mature, less cross-platform, less safe especially in RAID5/6, and it cannot match the ease-of-use of 2 high-level commands.
I have been using it for my home server and wanted to share my setup, but decided to first explain why ZFS is so cool --- details about how I use it may follow in another post.

The best introduction into how ZFS works internally can be found on [Jim Salter's blog](https://jrs-s.net/2018/04/11/primer-how-data-is-stored-on-disk-with-zfs/).
In fact, if you are interested, you should seriously *go read every single one of his posts on ZFS*.
Thank me later.

#### Safety
ZFS is safe.
The core feature here is that it checksums every block as it is written, thereby allowing error detection (and correction if redundancy/parity exists).
It supports equivalents of RAID 0, 5 and 6 to provide parity, and can store metadata and/or data multiple times on the same disk if some safety is wanted but RAID is not feasible for some reason.

It is also copy-on-write (COW), meaning that blocks are not overwritten. Instead, new blocks containing the new data are created and pointers are switched afterwards.
This means that the old blocks are still on disk until they are needed.
ZFS provides snapshots, which allow rolling the pointers back to old versions.
This is fantastic protection against human error, such as accidental deletions, or ransomware attacks.

Security-wise, it also provides encryption (on Linux, as of the 0.8.x branch) using keys or passphrases.

#### Ease of Use
ZFS was created to be an integrated solution for storage management.
As such, it is not *really* just a filesystem, instead also taking on the role of volume manager and RAID controller as needed.
Think of it like it's own complete top-to-bottom software stack.
That allows it to optimize and abstract much better than other solutions and provide a nice, easy to use, high-level set of management commands.

And it's very nice to work with because of that.
Instead of creating a RAID using a hardware controller or Linux software RAID (`mdadm`), then partitioning it with LVM so partitions can be moved and resized, and then creating a filesystem on top, it can all be done in one command:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo zpool create dpool -o $options (mirror|raidz1|raidz2|raidz3) /dev/sda1 /dev/sda2 ...
{% endhighlight %}

And everything is set up! The pool will already be mounted to `/dpool`.
A mirror is RAID0, and RAIDZ is like a safer version of RAID5/6/...
I like using mirrors because they provide double the read speed, double the random-access IOPS (very important for spinning-rust HDDs!) and much faster rebuilds in case of failure. Also, Jim Salter [recommends](https://jrs-s.net/2015/02/06/zfs-you-should-use-mirror-vdevs-not-raidz/) doing so.

Additional "partitions", which ZFS calls "datasets" can easily be created using the `zfs` command:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo zfs create -p dpool/users/{foo,bar}
{% endhighlight %}

No need to manually separate the drives into partitions.
Each dataset can be independently snapshotted, encrypted, quota'd and whatever else you wanna do with it.
They can also be shared, because yes, ZFS can share partitions over NFSv4 or SMB/CIFS (Windows network share)!

Now go ahead, read up on this awesome filesystem.
I'll probably write about my setup in a bit.
