---
title: I Built a NAS
category: linux
published: true
tags: ['nas', 'samba', 'cifs', 'zfs']
comments: false
---

I built a NAS in september and decided to revive my blog and write about it.<br/>
Like every other tech blog, this is not because I am awesome or anything, but simply because I am afraid that I will forget everything I learned, and writing about it 1. Helps me remember and 2. Lets me look things up if I forget them.

So, expect some new posts in the coming weeks, most of which will be linux-y and sysadmin-y topics.

### My NAS

The system is pretty much done and has been running for nearly 2 months, so much of what I will be writing will be retroactive - I hope that that will not reduce the quality too much.
This post is an introduction of sorts, giving some context and helping understand the following posts.

I had the following goals when building it:

1. secure storage, space for multiple disks
2. target for backups
3. family-wide cloud with room for expansion
4. media streaming inside and outside the home
5. freedom to do what I want and room to learn
6. performance headroom, so I can do compute-intensive things, run VMs etc. if I want to

Which has led to the following hardware setup:

- A mini-itx system with room for 6 3.5" disks
- Ryzen 2 2600 and 16GB of ECC RAM
- Gigabit LAN to the router
- Ubuntu Server 18.04 LTS
- a Crucial M.2 SATA SSD for the OS
- 2 mirrored 8TB WD Reds for storage

I am using ZFS as data filesystem because it provides unmatched safety, ease of use and advanced features. More on that to follow in a future post!<br/>
ZFS on root is not supported in 18.04 and will not be usable in production until at least 20.04, so my root filesystem is a more traditional Linux setup: Ext4 on LVM.
I did not want to give up some ability to snapshot before upgrades and re-arrange partitions as needed.

Quite a lot of software went into this, the most user-facing ones being

- Nextcloud
- Jellyfin
- Pi-Hole

Background software includes

- docker(-compose)
- sanoid
- OpenLDAP
- Icinga2
- nginx
- certbot
- netdata
- beets

I will describe some parts of the setup in more detail when I feel like it, and new stuff as I add it. See you!

